





Fluid Statics
ENME 341 - Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics
Dr. Paul Ziad´e paul.ziade@ucalgary.ca

Learning Objectives
At the end of this section, you should be able to
• Understand the fundamental nature of pressure
• Calculate the pressure variation in a fluid at rest
• Compute the hydrostatic forces on plane and curved surfaces
• Have an understanding of the different ways to measure pressure

2 Fluid Statics
In this section, we will begin with the fundamental definition of pressure and slowly increase the level of complexity to see how pressure can exert a force on a surface of arbitrary shape. This section focuses on fluids at rest. We will explore fluids in motion in the following chapters.

2.1 Pressure
You probably already have an intuitive sense of the concept of pressure. Here, we will formalize the definition. First, pressure is the analog of normal stress in solid mechanics. Like stress, it has units of force per unit area. Pressure refers to the tendency of a fluid to apply a normal force on a surface (as opposed to a shearing force). The normal force per unit area, exerted on a plane surface, which can be real or imaginary, is due to the bombardment of that surface with the fluid molecules.
A question now arises: If we consider a point in the fluid, how does the pressure vary with the orientation of a surface/plane (again, real or imaginary) passing through the point? To help answer this question, let's consider a fluid element, as shown below (Fig.1), which has a wedge shape with arbitrary angle ?.






Figure 1: Free-body diagram of a wedge-shaped fluid element

Let's assume that there are no shearing forces. Thus, the only external forces on the wedge are due to pressure and gravity. We will generalize our discussion here and not limit ourselves to fluids at rest; that is, the fluid element is allowed to have accelerated motion. The zero-shear assumption is still valid as long as the fluid mass moves as a rigid body (more on this later).
Let's perform a dynamic analysis on the fluid element. For simplicity, the x- direction forces are not shown but are present. Gravity acts in the -z direction. The equations of motion (Newton's second law) for the fluid element are
SF = p dxdz - p dxds sin ? = ?dxdydz a

y	y	s

2	y
dxdydz	dxdydz

(1)

SFz = pzdxdy - psdxds cos ? - ?

2	= ?	2	az

Recall that Newton's second law is a balance of forces, not stresses/pressure. Therefore, we multiplied all pressures by the area on which they are applied. ay and az are the accelerations in the y and z directions, respectively. From geometry, we know that


and

Therefore, we have

dz = ds sin ? dy = ds cos ?
p dxdz - p dxdz = ?dxdydz a

y	s
dxdydz

2	y
dxdydz

(2)

pzdxdy - psdxdy - ?

which simplifies to

2	= ?	2	az


py - ps

dy
= ?	ay
2
dz



(3)

pz - ps = (?az + ?) 2




Recall that our initial question was about the behaviour of the pressure at a point. Therefore, let's take the limit as dx, dy, dz ? 0:

py = ps	pz = ps	(4)

or,
(5)

This important result, which states that the pressure at a point in a fluid at rest or in motion is independent of direction (as long as there are no shearing stresses), is known as Pascal's law.
Now that we know the pressure variation at a point (or lack thereof) with orientation, we will now explore the pressure variation in space.

2.2 Pressure Variation in Space
In this section, we will explore how the pressure, which is defined at a point (i.e.,
p = p(x, y, z)), varies in space. Furthermore, we wish to prove the following:
1. Pressure in a stationary fluid of "low" density (?) is constant
2. If ? /˜ 0, the pressure varies linearly with height in a stationary fluid
Let's begin by proving (1). Consider the force exerted on a fluid element, as shown below.


Figure 2: Free-body diagram of a fluid element




Note that we have not included the body force due to gravity since ? ˜ 0. The pressure, p, in the above FBD is located at the center of the volume. Let's focus on the force balance in the z-direction. We have

SF = (p - ?p dz ) dxdy - (p + ?p dz ) dxdy = ?Va


(6)


where V = dxdydz. The p terms in brackets cancel, leaving us with


?(dxdydz)az

= -	?p	dxdydz	(7)
?z

If the fluid is at rest, az = 0. Furthermore, we assume no other external forces are acting in the z-direction. Therefore, we are left with
?p
= 0	(8)
?z
In fact, for the conditions considered (a "low" density fluid at rest),

?p	?p
=
?x	?y

?p
=	= 0	(9)
?z

Thus, we conclude that unless acted on by another force, the pressure through- out a "low density" fluid at rest is constant.
Let's now move on to proving (2). That is, what if we can no longer ignore the effect of gravity (i.e., ? /˜ 0).


Figure 3: Free-body diagram of a fluid element.




Note in the above that we now have the gravitational force, ?dxdydz, include. Our force balance in the z-direction is now


?(dxdydz)az

= -	?p	dxdydz - ?g(dxdydz)	(10)
?z


Again, we assume a fluid at rest, with az = 0. Therefore,
?p (dxdydz) = -?g(dxdydz)	(11)
?z
or,
(12)

Thus, the change in pressure is equal to -?g. So what is the pressure field ? That is, what is the relationship between pressure and position z? First, we note that
?p	?p
=	= 0
?y	?x
and,



Integrating, we have

?p	dp
=
?z	dz



or,

dpdz =	(-?g) dz dz




(13)

What assumption was made in the integration? We assumed that pressure varies with z but that the density, ?, is constant. This is a reasonable assumption in many cases. We define a fluid where ? = const as incompressible and one where ? /= const as compressible.

Consider the vessel filled with fluid below. The vessel is open to the atmosphere, with the surface pressure of the fluid, located at z = zs, equal to the atmospheric pressure patm.






Z=ZS







z = 0

Figure 4: A fluid-filled vessel open to atmosphere.

We know that the pressure distribution in the fluid is of the form

p = -?gz + c
To solve for the integration constant c, we need to use a boundary condition. That is, if we know the pressure at a certain location, we can solve for c. Luckily, we do have the pressure at the fluid surface: the atmospheric pressure, patm.
Thus, at the boundary, we have

p(zs) = patm = -?gzs + c

or,
c = patm + ?gzs
Therefore, the general solution is

p(z) = -?gz + patm + ?gzs


or,


p(z) = ?g(zs - z) + patm	(14)


2.3 Pressure Measurement
Now that we know what pressure is, it is time to explore how we go about measuring pressure.

First, let us make a note. Pressure can be reported either as an absolute pres- sure or a gage pressure. Absolute pressure is measured relative to a perfect vacuum. On the other hand, gage pressure is measured relative to the local at- mospheric pressure. This means that a zero gage pressure reading corresponds to a pressure equal to the local atmosphere.

In our study of pressure (and fluid mechanics as a whole), we will make frequent use of standard atmospheric properties. These properties are idealized values




gained from time-mean, middle-latitude conditions. Standard atmospheric con- ditions are reproduced in the table below:


Figure 5: Standard atmospheric conditions

The measurement of atmosphere pressure is accomplished using a barometer. Specifically, a mercury barometer has often been the standard. A barometer is simply a glass tube, closed at one end, with the open end immersed in a mercury-filled vessel, as shown below.


Figure 6: A mercury barometer

To satisfy equilibrium, the weight of the mercury in the tube plus the vapor force must balance the force due to atmospheric pressure. That is,
patm = ?h + pvapor	(15)
Typically, the vapor pressure contribution is negligibly small. Since mercury is the most-used barometer fluid, it has been conventional to report atmospheric pressure in terms of millimeters or inches of mercury. Standard atmospheric pressure is roughly 29.9 inches of mercury. Note that if water were used as the working fluid, with its specific being much lower than that of mercury, the standard atmosphere would require a tube over 34 feet in length!




Measuring pressure in engineered devices has typically been accomplished using liquid columns arranged in vertical or inclined tubes. These devices are called manometers. We will explore a few of these devices.


2.3.1 Piezometer Tube
This is the simplest type of manometer, consisting of an open vertical tube attached to a container in which the internal pressure measurement is desired, as shown below.


Figure 7: A piezometer

Since the fluid column is open, the equation describing the internal pressure of the container is
pA = ?h1 + p0	(16)
where p0 is the reference pressure at the top of the fluid column. Since the column is open to the atmosphere, expressed in gage pressure, the container pressure is simply
pA = ?h1	(17)
since o0 = patm. A classic example of a piezometer is a sphygmomanometer, which is used to measure blood pressure. Note that the piezometer can only be used if the container pressure is greater than atmospheric pressure.

2.3.2 U-Tube Manometer
Introducing a "U-bend" into the manometer has a few advantages. First, we can use a gage fluid with a higher specific weight than the container pressure. This allows for the ability to measure the pressure in a gas.






Figure 8: A U-Tube manometer

The pressure, pA, can be measured by repeated application of the hydrostatic relationship. That is, we can "walk through" the manometer from one end to the other. Let's do this for the U-tube manometer above.

First, since there is no change in elevation between A and (1),
p1 = pA
We then step down from (1) to (2) in the fluid with ?1. That is,
p2 = p1 + ?1h1 = pA + ?1h1
We are now located in the gage fluid with ?2. We could step down from (2), walk across the bottom of the U-tube, then back up to (3). A quick calculation will tell you that the pressure rise from (2) to the bottom will be cancelled by the pressure drop from the bottom to (3). Therefore,
p3 = p2
We then move up the column from (3) to the open end where the gage fluid meets the atmosphere. That is,
patm = p3 + ?2(-h2)

which can be expressed as


or,

patm = pA + ?1h1 - ?2h2 pA = patm - ?1h1 + ?2h2

U-tube manometers are very useful, particularly in their ability to measure gas pressure. Note that if we increase the density (thus ?) of the gage fluid, we can practically measure much larger pressures. This, however, comes at the cost of resolution. On the other hand, decreasing the gage fluid density increases the resolution but limits the range of pressure measurements possible.




2.3.3 Inclined-Tube Manometer
Increase in resolution can be achieved using an inclined manometer, as shown below. This allows for the measurement of small pressure changes. One leg of the manometer is inclined at an angle ? with respect to horizontal.




Figure 9: An inclined-tube manometer

Referring to the figure above, we can measure the pressure difference pA - pB
as follows. Once again, we "walk through" the manometer.

pA + ?1h1 - ?2l2 sin ? - ?3h3 = pB


or,


pA - pB = ?2l2 sin ? + ?3h3 - ?1h1

Note that if containers A and B contain a gas, the above can reasonably be simplified as
pA - pB = ?l2 sin ?
The above shows that the incline allows for a high-resolution reading of even small pressure changes. Solving for l2,
l = pA - pB
2	?2 sin ?
we see that even a small incline will result in a large change in l2 due to a pressure difference, since sin ? is less than 1 for angles less than 90 degrees.

2.4 Hydrostatic Force on a Plane Surface
In this section, we explore the pressure forces exerted on an object submerged in a fluid. We will explore forces on planar and curved surfaces. For fluids at rest, we know that the force is perpendicular to the surface since pressure forces exert no shear. If we consider the tank below, the horizontal surface experiences the same pressure. That is because the surface is at the same elevation throughout. Thus, the magnitude of the resultant force is

Fr = pA	(18)

where A is the area of the bottom surface. For the tank shown, p = ?gh = ?h.






Figure 10: Pressure distribution on the bottom and vertical walls of an open tank.

Note that we are denoting all pressures as gauge pressures (hence why the pres- sure at the surface is p = 0). Note that since the pressure is constant over the bottom surface, the resultant force is placed at the centroid of the area shown.

On the other hand, if we consider the pressure force on the vertical walls of the tank, the pressure is not constant. Thus, determination of the resultant force and its location can be slightly more challenging. The pressure distribution is linear, as expected, ranging from p = 0 at the surface to p = ?h at the bottom wall.
Let's consider a somewhat general case of an inclined plane surface submerged in a fluid, we shown below.






Figure 11: A submerged inclined surface of arbitrary shape.

The fluid surface is open to atmosphere. The solid surface makes an angle ? with the free surface. We let (0, 0) coincide with the intersection of the free surface plane and solid surface plane. Also, note that y = 0 is defined, in this case, at the free surface.

Consider the differential area dA on the solid surface. At any depth, h, the force on dA is
dF = ?h dA	(19)
This differential force is perpendicular to the surface. Recall that pressure exerts a normal force. Therefore, the magnitude of the resultant force can be found by taking the summation of all differential forces over the surface:

FR =	?h dA =	?y sin ? dA	(20)
A	A
where h = y sin ?.




For a plane surface, ? will be constant. In addition, we can make the reasonable assumption that ? is constant. Therefore,

FR = ? sin ?	y dA	(21)
A

You might have encountered the integral A y dA before. It is the first moment of area with respect to the axis. The first moment of area is related to the centroid of the surface as follows:

y =  A y dA
c	A


(22)


Therefore, we can replace the above equation for FR with

(23)

or,
(24)
where hc is the vertical distance from the fluid surface to the centroid of the area.

Although the magnitude of the resultant force is a function of the centroid, its location in fact does not pass through it. Referring to the schematic above, let's denote yR as the location where the resultant force is applied. The moment about the origin due to FR is simply

MO = FRyR	(25)

But FR is due to a distributed pressure force. That is, it is simply the effective result of a bunch of small differential pressure forces on small differential areas. Therefore, the moment described in Eqn.25 must be equal to the moment due to the distributed pressure force. That is,

FRyR =	y dF =	? sin ?y2 dA	(26)
A	A

Substituting the expression for FR from Eqn.23, we are left with
J y2dA

yR =  A	
ycA

(27)

The integral JA y dA is called the second moment of area, Ix, with respect to the
2
axis formed by the intersection of the solid surface plane and the free surface. Second moment of area, also known as the moment of inertia (although I do not like to use this term), is a geometric property describing the distribution of the points on an object in relation to an arbitrary axis. You will also encounter the second moment of area in your mechanics of solids course.




So, using this new notation, we write the location of the resultant force as

(28)

In a similar manner, the x-coordinate of the resultant force location can be found. This time we look at the moment about the y-axis and note that

FRxR =	? sin ?xy dA	(29)
A

which gives us


where Ixy is the second moment of area with respect to the x and y axes.



(30)


Second moments of area are widely tabulated. A few are given in your textbook (Gerhart et al.) and reproduced below.

Figure 12: Geometric properties of common shapes.

Note that most tabulated geometric data provides the second moments of area with respect to the centroid. However, for yR we require it about the x-axis;




for xR we need it about both the x and y axes. To help with this, we use the
parallel-axis theorem, which states that


Ix = Ixc + Ay2

(31)


and
Ixy = Ixyc + Axcyc	(32)
Therefore, the point (xR, yR) can be expressed as

(33)

and
(34)

In the above, Ixc is the the second moment of area with respect to an axis passing through its centroid and parallel to the x-axis. Similarly, Ixyc is the second moment of area with respect to an orthogonal coordinate system passing through the centroid.

The location (xR, yR) where the resultant force acts is called the center of pressure.




Example 2.1. Consider a horizontal cylinder filled with fluid. One of the ends is a circular gate.

g








B


Assume it is vented to atmosphere at the top. The fluid is incompressible with density, ?. The gate is held shut by a restraint at point B at the bottom.

What is the reaction force applied by the restraint on the gate? Let's look at the hydrostatic forces on the gate.

FB

The hydrostatic force on the gate is expressed as

FR = ?gAyc

where yc is the location of the centroid relative to the free surface. In the above,
yc = D/2 and A = (p/4)D2.
F = ?g p D2 ( D )


or,

R	4	2
F  = 1 ?gpD3
R	8

The resultant hydrostatic force, FR, is applied at the location yR. yR is located




somewhere below the centroid. We can calculate yR as follows:


yR = yc


+ Ixc ycA
( pD4 }


= 2 + D  p D2 
2	4
5
=	D
8


FR



Looking at the FBD, we see three forces acting on the gate: the resultant hy- drostatic force, FR, the applied restraint force, FB, and the reaction force at the pivot point, FP .

Since the gate is stationary, and we do not know Fp, it is convenient to set
  + X Mc = 0


For our case, we have
  + X Mc



= FR

(yR


- D	- F
2	B

( D ) = 0

F ( 5 D - D ) - F

( D ) = 0



We find, or,


1
FB = 4 FR



2.5 Hydrostatic Force on a Curved Surface
Consider an arbitrary surface S, as shown below:

n
n

Figure 13: An arbitrary surface.

where nˆ is the surface unit normal, which points outward. The hydrostatic force on an elemental area dA is
dF_ = -pnˆdA	(35)
Let's consider the curved immersed surface below:



ds



s





Figure 14: A curved surface.




Let's calculate the total hydrostatic force on the surface.

F_ =  dF_


= -	nˆp dA
S

(36)

z	s
= -	nˆp ds dz
0	0
In the above, s = s(y) and nˆ = sˆ. The double integration may be doable for simple curves s = s(y), but it gets messy really fast.

Instead, let's do a force balance on the fluid volume above the curve,

x

Figure 15: Force balance on the fluid volume.

where F_1 is the force applied by the fluid to the left of the volume, F_2 is the equivalent force applied to the fluid by the curved surface, and F_g is the fluid weight.

The force applied by the fluid to the left of the volume is, as before,
F1 = ?gAyc
= 1 ?gH2W	(37)
2
where H is the height of the fluid volume and W is the depth. The volume of fluid is stationary, so



Also,

L Fx = 0 = F1 - F2x	(38)

L Fy = 0 = F2y - Fg
= F2y - ?Vg


(39)




where, in the above, s = s(y) is needed to calculate V.




Example 2.2. (Problem 2.128 - Gerhart et al.) An open tank containing water has a bulge in its vertical side that is semicircular in shape, as shown in the figure below. Determine the horizontal and vertical components of the force that the water exerts on the bulge. Base your analysis on a 1-ft length of the bulge.



We will apply the method shown for curved surfaces. We will look at a free-body diagram of the fluid in contact with the curved solid surface, as shown below.



Let's first look at F1, which corresponds to the force on the fluid volume due to the fluid to the left of the volume. As we saw for forces on planar surfaces,

F1 = ?H2OhcA

For our case, this is
F =	62.4  lb	(6 ft + 3 ft)(6ft × 1ft) = 3370 lb
1	ft3




Now we calculate the weight of the fluid:

W = ?H2OV
(	 lb ) ( p(3 ft)2 )


= 882 lb

To satisfy equilibrium, we must have

FV = W = 882 lb (up)

and
FH = F1 = 3370 lb (left)
Note, however, that the above values and directions were obtained from a free- body diagram of the forces on the fluid volume. However, we are asked to find the force due to the fluid on the curved surface. Therefore, Newton's 3rd law requires that the forces on the curved surface be


and

which makes intuitive sense.



2.6 Buoyancy
The final topic we will explore in fluid statics is buoyancy. When an object is partially or fully submerged, there is an upward force acting on it. This net upward force is caused because of the difference in magnitude of fluid pressure above and below the object, with the latter being larger, as we have seen in hydrostatics and shown schematically below.


Figure 16: Pressure distribution on a submerged body.

We can determine this buoyancy force. We enclose the submerged body in a parallelepiped, as shown below.


We then consider the fluid within the parallelepiped, with the object removed. The free-body diagram of the fluid is shown,






where F1, F2, F3, F4 are the pressure forces exerted on the plane surfaces of the parallelepiped. W is the weight of the fluid volume and FB is the force the body is of volume V is exerted on the fluid.

The forces on the vertical surfaces cancel each other. Therefore, the equilibrium equation of interest is in the z-direction. We have
FB = F2 - F1 - W	(40)
where you are reminded again that W is the weight of the fluid. For a constant specific weight, ?, (i.e., an incompressible fluid),

F1 = ?h1A

and
F2 = ?h2A
where A is the horizontal area of the upper and lower surfaces. Therefore,
F2 - F1 = ?(h2 - h1)A	(41)
which allows us to express the buoyancy force from Eqn.40 as

FB = ?(h2 - h1)A - W	(42)
Now the weight of the fluid is equal to

W = ?Vfluid
We can express the volume of the fluid as

                                     Vfluid = (h2 - h1)A - V	(43) where V is the volume of the submerged object. Therefore,
W = ?[(h2 - h1)A - V]
Thus, Eqn. 42 becomes

FB = ?(h2 - h1)A - ?[(h2 - h1)A - V]	(44)




or,
(45)
What this tells us is that the buoyant force has a magnitude equal to weight of the fluid displaced by the body. The direction of the buoyant force, which is the force of the fluid on the body, is in the opposite direction to that shown on the free-body diagram above. Thus, the buoyant force is directed upward. This result is known as Archimedes' Principle.

These results also apply to partially submerged bodies.


